in this video let us discuss about doubly linked list
So we have already learned about linked List but we
learned about singly linked list
We also have doubly linked list which are likes singly
list
But here each node contain three fields one data
field and two link fields a link to the previous
node prev
And then we have the data part data and again
a link to the next node
Next in Singly linked List we had only two
fields in a node the data part and the next
part
But here the node prefers not only the next node
but also the previous node
So in Java programming for a node in a doubly
linked list we can create a class node
The data can be of any type like individual character
floating point double etcetera
But let's assume it is integer so int data
And then we need references to the previous node and
next node
So node prev and node next
So this will be a doubly linked List node
Now let us see an example doubly linked List
So just like in singly linked list in doubly linked
list Also head points to the first node and the
next part of last node points to null
And since we have a previous pointer also the prev
part of First node will also point to null
So in this example we have 3 nodes here with
data part and two links
At addresses 1000,2000 and 3000
The elements are 10 20 and 30 and since this
is it doubly linked list we have links in forward as
well
As Backward direction and firstly the prev part of first
node and next part of last node will point to
null and then the first node's next should point to
the next node
Then the second node's prev points to first node at
its next points to the third node and third node's
prev should point to 2nd node
So this is how the linked list node's are connected
Now let us discuss the advantages of doubly linked list
Unlike singly linked list we can have bi directional
navigation in doubly linked list and some operations like deletion
and insertion can be easier since we can get the
previous node easily without any traversal
Now what is the main disadvantage of doubly linked list
Here extra memory is needed for referring the previous
node also so basic operations become expensive because we need
to maintain both prev and next references for each operation
Now let us see a sample programme to create a
doubly linked list with three node's with data 10 20
and 30 and displayed in forward and backward directions
So first let us create the class node with node
prev to refer the previous node and int data to
store integer type data of the node and node
Next to refer the next node now declare variables of
node type for head middle and last node's
So write node head middle and last so memories allocated
in the stack
So now we can use new to locate memory dynamically
for head Middle and last node's
So write head equal to new node so memory will
be allocated in the heap section and it returns the
reference to that memory and similarly memories alocated in heap
for middle node and last node
So now we have the node's
Next we need values in the node's so let us
assign values 10 20 and 30 to the node's so
we know the values will be stored in the data
part
So write head dot data equal to 10
So 10 a stored in the data part of head
node
Similarly add 20 and 30 in middle and last node's
So write middle dot data equal to 20 and last
dot data equal to 30
So now we have the node's with values
Next step is that these node's should be linked
That is the linked list should be like head node
middle node and last node
So let its link them using the prev and next
references
Firstly the prev first node should point to null so
set head dot prev equal to null
Next connect head to middle node so write head dot
next equal to Middle 2000 will be stored in next
of head
Now let us handle the middle node
Its previous node should be head so write middle dot
prev equal to head so 1000 will be stored here
and it's next node should be the last node
So write middle dot next equal to last so 3000
will be stored in the next part of middle and
last node its previous node should be middle
So set last dot prev equal to middle so 2000
will be stored here and since it is the last
node it's next should be pointing to null
So write last dot next equal to null
So now we have are linked less with three node's
properly connected
Now let us print each node's data in the linked
list
So different each node's data
We have to traverse the linked list fully and unlike
singly linked List we need to Travers from the beginning to end
as well as in the opposite way
So first let us see the forward reversal
So we are traversing from the beginning to end and
we can identify the end easily since the last node's
next will be null
So start from the head and print the data and
repeat til we have node's next equal to null so
first create a temporary variable temp and initialised to head node
So write node temp equal to head
Now we have a while loop while temp not equal
to null so this loop will continue till temp becomes
null so print the data which is present in the
TEMP node so write system dot out dot println
of temp dot
Data so it will print the value ten Now move
temp to the next node
So write temp equal to temp dot Next
So now temp points to 2000
Now check the condition and it holds so printed data
at address 2000 which is 20 now moved temp to
the next node
So now temp equal to 3000 now checked the condition
and it holds
So print the data at address 3000 which is 30
now move temp to the next node
So now temp equal to null
Since temp next is equal to null now check the
condition again and it will fail
So control comes out of the loop and we got
each node's data printed on this screen
So that was forward traversal
Now let us see the reversed traversal
So we are traversing from the end to the beginning
and we can identify the starting node very easily because
it's prev will be equal to null so
Start from the last and print the data and repeat
til we have node's prev equal to null so first
created temporary node temp and initialised to last node
write
node temp equal to last
Now we have a while loop while temp not equal
to null
So this loop will continue till TEMP becomes null
In first iteration the condition is okay
So print the data which is present in temp node
which is the last node now
So we have system
dot out dot Println of temp dot data which will
print the value 30 and now move temp to the
previous node
So write temp equal to tempt dot So now 10
points to the address 2000 now check the condition and
it holds so print The data address 2000 which is 20
now move temp to the previous node
So now temp equal to 1000 Now check the condition and
it holds
So print the data at address 1000 which is ten now
Move temp to the previous node again
So temp will now be equal to null
Since temp prev is equal to null now check the condition
again and it will fail
So the control comes out of the loop and see
we got each node's data printed in the reverse order
So that's how forward and reversal are performed in
a doubly linked list
Now let us discuss about the real time applications of
a doubly linked list so it can be used in
undo redo systems and the next and previous functions
in a music or a video playlist etc.